[Amit Varma]: Before you listen to this episode of The Scene and the Unseen, I have a recommendation for
[Amit Varma]: you.
[Amit Varma]: Do check out Pulya Bazi, hosted by Saurabh Chandra and Pranay Kotesane, two really good
[Amit Varma]: friends of mine.
[Amit Varma]: Kick-ass podcast in Hindi, it's amazing.
[Amit Varma]: A few days ago, my aunt in the US wrote to me.
[Amit Varma]: She is visiting India at the end of January, after many years, and wanted to know what
[Amit Varma]: gift I wanted from there.
[Amit Varma]: I assured her that I wanted nothing, but she insisted, saying that she was going to get
[Amit Varma]: me a gift anyway, and it might as well be something I wanted that I could not get in
[Amit Varma]: India.
[Amit Varma]: That got me thinking.
[Amit Varma]: I grew up as a kid in the 1980s, and in those days when our relatives visited from America,
[Amit Varma]: they would come laden with unimaginable, almost magical goodies.
[Amit Varma]: There was so much that you did not get in India.
[Amit Varma]: But now, wracking my brains, I couldn't think of anything that I could not get here.
[Amit Varma]: Clothes, electronics, perfumes, books, music, and everything is available here.
[Amit Varma]: Finally, I asked my aunt to get me some assault rifles.
[Amit Varma]: But in a larger sense, this got me to thinking how much my world has changed.
[Amit Varma]: Back in the day, we used to scramble even to listen to good music.
[Amit Varma]: We'd spend days sourcing music and getting mixtapes made, and every new song we gathered
[Amit Varma]: was like a treasure.
[Amit Varma]: We had limited ways of watching movies from around the world, and I remember how eagerly
[Amit Varma]: we tuned in to watch the one eclectic film per week that Doordarshan showed in a late
[Amit Varma]: night slot.
[Amit Varma]: People often speak of how the film, in which Annie gives it those ones, was shown only
[Amit Varma]: once on Indian television.
[Amit Varma]: Well, I remember watching it that one time, as I am sure do many other Indian kids my
[Amit Varma]: age.
[Amit Varma]: There was nothing else.
[Amit Varma]: Today, we can play any song we want to on Google Play or Amazon Prime or Apple Music.
[Amit Varma]: We can stream a whole world of movies, and the technology on our phone today is the science
[Amit Varma]: fiction of yesterday.
[Amit Varma]: I think it was my friend Uday Shankar who once said that the next generation will not
[Amit Varma]: know what it is like to get lost.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: GPS Zindabad.
[Amit Varma]: Though as a caveat, battery is Murdabad.
[Amit Varma]: But battery life aside, our lives are just bloody astonishing.
[Unknown]: And we take all this progress for granted.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Steven Pinker, who I regard as one of the great public intellectuals of
[Amit Varma]: our times, and someone who's been a huge personal influence on me.
[Amit Varma]: My favorite book by Pinker is The Blank Slate, which shone a light on what exactly human
[Amit Varma]: nature is and where it comes from, and gave me a deep sense of the contingency of my existence
[Amit Varma]: and my personality and my identity.
[Amit Varma]: All that is a recipe for humility, but it also gave me a sense of awe and wonder at
[Amit Varma]: the complexity of the machinery in our brains.
[Amit Varma]: But the book that is the subject of this episode is his latest book Enlightenment Now, which
[Amit Varma]: demonstrates using exhaustive data, how the world has gotten better across every metric
[Amit Varma]: that we can possibly think of, and how we need to respect enlightenment values if we
[Amit Varma]: are to preserve and enhance this fragile progress.
[Amit Varma]: I met Steven at the sidelines of the recent Times Literary Festival in Mumbai, and we
[Amit Varma]: recorded in a makeshift studio we set up at the venue.
[Amit Varma]: So please do excuse us for any sound disturbances.
[Amit Varma]: Also, I'd originally requested a two hour interview.
[Amit Varma]: He promised me an hour instead, but due to unavoidable circumstances, he needed to wrap
[Amit Varma]: it up in 40 minutes.
[Amit Varma]: So I couldn't quite manage to unwind into the sort of long leisurely conversation I
[Amit Varma]: like.
[Amit Varma]: But 40 minutes with Steven Pinker is still 40 minutes of enlightenment now, who can complain
[Amit Varma]: about that?
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break and get right into the conversation.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls?
[Amit Varma]: Well, worry no more, head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India and adapts them into objects of everyday use.
[Amit Varma]: These include wearable art, like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion covers and
[Amit Varma]: table runners, and accessories like tote bags.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price,
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales, just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, Indian Colors now has an exciting range of new products, including fridge magnets
[Amit Varma]: with some stunning motifs, and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood.
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vasvo X Vasvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip
[Amit Varma]: Sharma, Shruti Nelson, and Pradeep Mishra.
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting, but even if you want to
[Amit Varma]: buy just for yourself or a friend, head on over to IndianColors.com, that's colors
[Amit Varma]: with an OU.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20, that's IVM for IVM podcast, IVM20
[Amit Varma]: for a 20% discount at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Stephen, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Stephen, when I'm with my friends, I often ask them a question about what book changed
[Amit Varma]: the way they think about the world.
[Amit Varma]: And when the question comes back on me, my answer often is a blank slate, which of course
[Amit Varma]: you published in 2003.
[Amit Varma]: I want to turn the question back to you today.
[Amit Varma]: What is a book or what are the books which changed the way you view the world?
[Guest]: For me, there was not a single book I've written on many topics, and so my worldview on each
[Guest]: one of these topics was shaped by different books.
[Guest]: And also I tend not to be influenced by one thought leader or one theory.
[Guest]: I'm pretty eclectic, so there's usually a set of books that influences me.
[Guest]: When it comes to the topic of my most recent book, Enlightenment Now, probably the single
[Guest]: book that influenced me the most might have been David Deutsch's The Beginning of Infinity,
[Guest]: which put the whole idea of progress and enlightenment in a coherent framework.
[Guest]: But I was also influenced by books on global economic development, Charles Kenney's Getting
[Guest]: Better, Hans Rosling's podcasts and TED Talks and his recent book, Factfulness.
[Guest]: For the changes in war, I was influenced by the books of a political scientist named John
[Guest]: Mueller.
[Guest]: So it's always hard for me to pin down one book.
[Guest]: For other topics such as how the mind works, I was influenced by the writings of John Tooby
[Guest]: and Lita Kosmides, the evolutionary psychologists who are friends of mine, and Richard Dawkins
[Guest]: and Robert Trivers.
[Guest]: In the case of the language instinct, I was influenced by, of course, the writings of
[Guest]: Noam Chomsky, such as Language and Mind, Reflections on Language, both of which I read when I was
[Guest]: a student, as well as books by founders of psycholinguistics, that is the merger of linguistics
[Guest]: with psychology, such as George Miller and one of my advisors, Roger Brown.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And in your book, you started by saying that the thinkers of the Enlightenment code laid
[Amit Varma]: that foundation in what we now call humanism, which privileges the well-being of individual
[Amit Varma]: men, women and children over the glory of the tribe, race, nation, or religion, basically
[Amit Varma]: thinking in terms of individuals.
[Amit Varma]: And you point out three processes which make it possible, entropy, evolution, and information.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you just mentioned John Tooby, and you know, one of the memorable quotes of your
[Amit Varma]: book is when the title of a paper by him, the second law of thermodynamics is the first
[Amit Varma]: law of psychology.
[Amit Varma]: So, tell me a bit about why is entropy your central concept?
[Guest]: I think there are discoveries of science that ought to be fundamental to our understanding
[Guest]: of the human condition, just who we are, where we came from, what are our challenges.
[Guest]: Entropy is one of them.
[Guest]: The concept originally derived from thermodynamics that because there are so many more ways in
[Guest]: which things can be disordered, or random, or useless, and ordered, or structured, or
[Guest]: disordered, over the natural course of events, things go from orderly to chaotic, to random,
[Guest]: to disordered, unless there is the application of energy and knowledge, information that
[Guest]: can create circumscribed zones of order or structure, even if the universe as a whole
[Guest]: is more disordered, but at least in parts of the world close to us, it can be more ordered,
[Guest]: such as growing food, such as making shelters, such as fighting decay.
[Guest]: So entropy being one of a number of concepts that are fundamental to our understanding
[Guest]: of reality that were developed after the Enlightenment.
[Guest]: The Enlightenment thinkers by no means thought of everything.
[Guest]: And what entropy means is that we should realize that human effort and human knowledge are
[Guest]: always necessary, even to preserve the life that we enjoy now, let alone to make a better
[Guest]: life, that we don't need to find evil people, or forces, or demons that are trying to make
[Guest]: life difficult for us, that life being difficult is just what happens because of the laws of
[Guest]: the universe, unless we combat it.
[Guest]: Evolution is another idea that is critical to understanding the human condition, also
[Guest]: only discovered after the Enlightenment, namely that what makes us what we are, the process
[Guest]: of natural selection, did not shape us to be, to live in harmony, to be happy, to be
[Guest]: healthy.
[Guest]: Rather, evolution is driven by competition, amoral competition, and so human nature was
[Guest]: what was selected to prosper in that competition, and therefore human nature by itself does
[Guest]: not incline us to be particularly wise or beneficial just to be able to survive.
[Guest]: Now that includes abilities such as cognition, reason, problem solving, it includes emotions
[Guest]: like empathy, sympathy, self-control, that we can try to co-opt and strengthen to improve
[Guest]: our life, but only if we decide to enhance those parts of our nature can we expect human
[Guest]: life to improve.
[Guest]: Then the third concept is information, just the idea that order, non-randomness, knowledge
[Guest]: can be measured, can be explained in terms of material carriers of information, such
[Guest]: as brains, such as communications media.
[Guest]: So we can understand the whole world of knowledge, ideas, in a rigorous way that does not contradict
[Guest]: the idea that we are hunks of matter that were produced by evolution, because we know
[Guest]: that physical objects can be processors of information, including brains.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you talk about progressophobia, or what you call, and there's a great quote
[Amit Varma]: from you where you say, start quote, intellectuals hate progress.
[Amit Varma]: Intellectuals who call themselves progressive really hate progress.
[Amit Varma]: It's not that they hate the fruits of progress, mind you.
[Amit Varma]: Most pundits, critics, and their bien-pensant readers use computers rather than quills and
[Amit Varma]: inkwells, and they prefer to have their surgery with anesthesia rather than without it.
[Amit Varma]: It's the idea of progress that rankles the chattering class, the enlightenment belief
[Amit Varma]: that by understanding the world, we can improve the human condition, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Why do intellectuals hate progress?
[Guest]: Yes, some of it is, it has not always been true, and of course it's not true of all intellectuals.
[Guest]: There does seem to be a major strain of intellectual thought of people who write op-eds in newspapers,
[Guest]: social critics, authors of books.
[Guest]: Part of it is just professional competition.
[Guest]: Most intellectuals aren't in charge of running things.
[Guest]: They aren't in charge of delivering clean water or curing disease or policing the streets
[Guest]: or negotiating peace, and so it's very easy to criticize society, which is a way of criticizing
[Guest]: other elites, other professionals, that everyone else is failing but them, and they're here
[Guest]: to point out the failings of their professional rivals, so I think that's one reason.
[Guest]: Another is that many of the processes that have improved the human condition don't necessarily
[Guest]: consist of what intellectuals deal with, verbally articulated propositions.
[Guest]: No one kind of voted the Industrial Revolution.
[Guest]: No one decided, no one even understands exactly why it was an increase in peace and a decline
[Guest]: in war since 1945, and processes that take place gradually through distributed knowledge
[Guest]: are markets, or another example, natural languages as they develop over the course of history.
[Guest]: No one's in charge.
[Guest]: No one plans them, and many intellectuals distrust processes of order that weren't designed
[Guest]: and implemented according to the principles laid down by intellectuals.
[Amit Varma]: Like Adam Ferguson said, a lot of human progress comes from human action, not human design,
[Amit Varma]: and intellectuals perhaps think in a top-down way, rather than understand the bottom-up
[Amit Varma]: spontaneous order which leads to markets, language, and so much progress.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: Now, in some cases, it really was the verbally articulated propositions of intellectuals
[Guest]: that did lead to progress, such as in the design of democracy in the United States around
[Guest]: the time of the founders, such as scientific theories that were put into practice, such
[Guest]: as vaccination and the germ theory of disease.
[Guest]: So it's not as if everything arises just from spontaneous cooperation, but aspects of human
[Guest]: progress that were not planned tend to be dismissed by many intellectuals.
[Amit Varma]: You also point out to a number of biases, like the optimism gap, the availability bias,
[Amit Varma]: the negativity bias, that we tend to sort of perceive the world as being worse than
[Amit Varma]: it is.
[Amit Varma]: And you have a great chart in your book which shows how media coverage, even as the world
[Amit Varma]: is getting better, media coverage gets more and more negative.
[Amit Varma]: And as a journalist, we are always taught to comfort the afflicted and afflict the comfortable,
[Amit Varma]: but obviously bad news sells, and no one's reporting that, hey, nothing happened today.
[Amit Varma]: Everything was peaceful.
[Guest]: Yes, and there are certain distortions that are just built into the nature of journalism
[Guest]: that will affect people's perception of the world.
[Guest]: We know that people's perception of risk and danger and probability is driven by available
[Guest]: examples in memory, the availability heuristic it's called.
[Guest]: And what journalism delivers is available instances for memory, explosions and gaffes
[Guest]: and disasters, things that are mediagenic tend to be bad because bad things can happen
[Guest]: very quickly.
[Guest]: Good things tend to build up gradually, such as the reduction in, say, global extreme poverty,
[Guest]: which has declined by about 137,000 people per day.
[Guest]: That can add up over 30 years to a billion and a quarter people have escaped from extreme
[Guest]: poverty, a major transformation of the world that people are unaware of because there was
[Guest]: never a Thursday in October in which it happened all of a sudden, it just gradually crept up.
[Guest]: But together with these inherent distorting factors, just because of the nature of journalism,
[Guest]: there is also part of the culture of journalism that puts negativity as a kind of a moral
[Guest]: virtue that if journalists report anything that's going well, they're now considered
[Guest]: to be corporate public relations hacks or government propagandists.
[Guest]: It's almost considered to be against journalistic ethics to report what goes well and that the
[Guest]: mission of journalism is to expose how the world is terrible and getting worse.
[Guest]: Now, of course, journalism obviously has to report the disasters, the crises, the catastrophes,
[Guest]: but if it's biased in that direction, then I have argued that it can lead to outcomes
[Guest]: that are worse than mere complacency, can lead to fatalism, to people thinking, well,
[Guest]: if things just get worse and worse no matter how many efforts have been applied to making
[Guest]: it better, well, what's the point of trying to make things better?
[Guest]: Everything fails.
[Guest]: Let's just enjoy ourselves individually while we can because hopes for reform are futile.
[Guest]: It can also lead to radicalism, to people just giving up on institutions of liberal
[Guest]: democracy saying, let's just destroy it all because anything that replaces it is bound
[Guest]: to be better than what we have now, or to leaders who promise, only I can solve the
[Guest]: problems, only I can fix it.
[Guest]: The entire establishment is so corrupt that you need to vote in someone who is powerful
[Guest]: and charismatic like me.
[Amit Varma]: So I agree with you, of course, but there's also the dilemma that, you know, like I'm
[Amit Varma]: an editor as well, and let's say you're the editor of a large newspaper.
[Amit Varma]: What do you tell your people?
[Amit Varma]: How do you change this culture?
[Amit Varma]: Because ultimately for your newspaper to survive, you've got to print news that people want
[Amit Varma]: to read, and you're catering to human nature in a sense.
[Guest]: Well, although it's not as if mainstream newspapers have hit on a formula for financial success
[Guest]: over the last 10 years, and a lot of people say that they now, a majority, according to
[Guest]: a Reuters poll, say that the news depresses them so much that they simply avoid it altogether.
[Guest]: There are data that suggests that even if the negative stories get more clicks, that
[Guest]: positive stories, at least stories that involve some positive affect, tend to last longer.
[Guest]: They have a longer tail, and they are more likely to lead people to sign up and subscribe.
[Guest]: So it may not be true that the only way to keep up clicks and eyeballs is to report disasters.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about enlightenment now.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you've got a great, you know, you quote a great question that Amos Tversky asked you,
[Amit Varma]: which is, quote, how much better can you imagine yourself feeling than you're feeling right
[Amit Varma]: now?
[Amit Varma]: How much worse can you imagine yourself feeling?
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, you know, when I read this, it was like, I can imagine myself a little
[Amit Varma]: bit better, but not really too much.
[Amit Varma]: And there's no end to how much worse I can be, which kind of illustrates the thesis of
[Amit Varma]: your book that the world has just gotten so much better.
[Guest]: Well, it illustrates how a feature of human psychology that we often leaves us unappreciative
[Guest]: of the progress that's taken place.
[Guest]: Somebody's observation about our emotional life, a feature of our psychology, sometimes
[Guest]: called the negativity bias, probably reflects the law of entropy that we talked about earlier,
[Guest]: namely, there really are more things that can go wrong than can go right.
[Guest]: And the things that can go wrong can hurt you a lot more than things that go right can
[Guest]: help you.
[Guest]: So there is an adaptive design to being more capable of feeling pain, more sensitive, or
[Guest]: vigilant for disaster, because there really are a lot of ways things can go wrong.
[Amit Varma]: And in addition to loss aversion, it's just a package deal that is...
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And what it leaves us ill-equipped to do is appreciate the kind of global and national
[Guest]: changes that can best be appreciated by data, by a more global synoptic view that aren't
[Guest]: things that naturally occur to us, but that we can best appreciate through data.
[Guest]: Although, of course, we also appreciate them in our day-to-day life.
[Guest]: Those of us who've lived long enough know that it really is better that you can stream
[Guest]: a movie whenever you want than have to wait for years for it to show up at a theater.
[Guest]: We know that dentistry is approved, that medical procedures have approved.
[Guest]: Many procedures now don't require cutting a person open, but can be done endoscopically.
[Guest]: So we do tend to notice these things, but they don't leave as much of an impact on our
[Guest]: mood and our psychology as they should if you consider them objectively.
[Amit Varma]: And what you've done in the very comprehensive second section of Enlightenment now is you've
[Amit Varma]: looked at all the different parameters that you can use for judging human welfare, like
[Amit Varma]: life, health, wealth, and so on, and shown how across all of them things have got better.
[Amit Varma]: Let's just skip through them one by one very quickly.
[Amit Varma]: In your chapter on life, I was very struck by this Johan Norberg quote about Kenya, where
[Amit Varma]: he's talking about Kenya between the years 2003 and 2013.
[Amit Varma]: And he says, quote, after having lived, loved, and struggled for a whole decade, the average
[Amit Varma]: person in Kenya had not lost a single year of their remaining lifetime.
[Amit Varma]: Everyone got 10 years older, yet death had not come a step closer, which, stop quote,
[Amit Varma]: which basically means in those 10 years, the life expectancy went up by 10 years.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: No, it is quite striking how, particularly in poor countries, how much life has improved
[Guest]: in a way that most Westerners and citizens of rich countries don't appreciate.
[Guest]: Because we're stuck with our images from the 1970s of the African kids with the swollen
[Guest]: bellies, surrounded by flies, and of the beggars with the bulls.
[Guest]: And we don't appreciate how much both health and prosperity and education, all three of
[Amit Varma]: those have increased in poorer countries.
[Amit Varma]: And when I talk about life expectancy going up, people often tell me that, oh, it's because
[Amit Varma]: child mortality rates are gone.
[Amit Varma]: But as you show through all your graphs in that particular chapter, it's not just that
[Amit Varma]: child mortality rates have gone down.
[Amit Varma]: Across the board, like even life expectancy for people reaching 50, for people who reach
[Amit Varma]: 65, across the board, life expectancy has just shot up.
[Guest]: Yes, which is important.
[Guest]: I did check that because of course, averages can be misleading.
[Guest]: And if it was simply that more babies were surviving, well, every time a baby survives,
[Guest]: you're adding many decades onto the average.
[Guest]: And so that could be misleading, even though of course, that itself would be a tremendous
[Guest]: moral progress if we prevented children from dying.
[Guest]: But it's even better than that, in that, as you summarized it accurately, a 60-year-old
[Guest]: has more years of life ahead of them now than a 60-year-old several decades ago.
[Amit Varma]: Let's go to your chapter on Chris.
[Amit Varma]: I was, you know, struck by the Chris Rock quote there, this is the first society in
[Amit Varma]: history and obviously he's talking about America, not India.
[Amit Varma]: This is the first society in history where the poor people are fat.
[Guest]: Yes, I'd rather, the kind of tactless but accurate comment that only a comedian can
[Guest]: get away with.
[Guest]: Although nowadays, even comedians can't get away with them.
[Guest]: But yes, obesity is a terrible problem in rich countries.
[Guest]: But as problems go, it's certainly better than malnutrition and starvation.
[Amit Varma]: And then you also write about how knowledge grows energy.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one example of that being Norman Borlaug's Green Revolution, where you write,
[Amit Varma]: quote, thanks to the Green Revolution, the world needs less than a third of the land
[Amit Varma]: it used to need to produce a given amount of food.
[Amit Varma]: Another way of stating this bounty is that between 1961 and 2009, the amount of land
[Amit Varma]: used to grow food increased by 12%, but the amount of food that was increased grew by
[Amit Varma]: 300%.
[Guest]: Yes, and it's not only a benefit to humanity to have more available food, but it's also
[Guest]: a benefit to the ecosystem, to the environment, the planet.
[Guest]: A newer approach to environmental protection, sometimes called eco-modernism or eco-pragmatism,
[Guest]: which is different from the traditional green movement.
[Guest]: Green movement tends to argue that we have to reduce our consumption, slow down or reverse
[Guest]: economic growth, live a more frugal lifestyle closer to nature.
[Guest]: And what we know is people don't want to do that, especially people in poor countries
[Guest]: who quite rightly want to get rich or at least want to achieve the standard of living that
[Guest]: countries in the West enjoy.
[Guest]: The eco-modernist movement says that what we should aim to do to protect the planet,
[Guest]: which we must do, it is an imperative, is to achieve the greatest human benefit with
[Guest]: least environmental cost.
[Guest]: And a lot of that requires densification, getting the same human benefit with less land
[Guest]: so that the land that is not exploited by humans can be preserved or even revert back
[Guest]: to a natural situation.
[Guest]: So that includes more intensive agriculture, that is growing more food on less land, which
[Guest]: means not more organic agriculture, but higher tech agriculture, especially bread, hybrid
[Guest]: varieties, genetically modified organisms, precision agriculture of the kind developed
[Guest]: in Israel that delivers the least amount of water and fertilizer to exactly where it's
[Guest]: needed, when it's needed.
[Guest]: And as farms contract, forests expand, which is a good thing.
[Guest]: Likewise, cities are good for the environment because you have people concentrated on less
[Guest]: land.
[Guest]: That means that more land can revert to natural conditions.
[Guest]: It also means that people use less energy because if you live in a city, you can walk
[Guest]: a block to get a quart of milk, you don't have to get in your car and drive several
[Guest]: miles as Americans often do.
[Guest]: It means that there's less energy expended in heating homes in the winter.
[Guest]: Because if people live in apartment buildings and one person's ceiling is another person's
[Guest]: floor and the heat can be shared, it means that you're spending less time in cars and
[Guest]: more shorter trips or pedestrian traffic.
[Guest]: So in general, cities paradoxically are good for the environment.
[Amit Varma]: And also the general advantages of urbanization that you have denser economic networks, therefore
[Amit Varma]: you have more specialization, more division of labor, more wealth.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the next chapter is on wealth where, you know, you go back to entropy and about
[Amit Varma]: how poverty is like the default condition, which people don't understand.
[Amit Varma]: People often feel entitled to wealth, not knowing that poverty is really the default
[Amit Varma]: condition and you quote the economist Peter Barr here saying, poverty has no causes, wealth
[Amit Varma]: has causes.
[Amit Varma]: And then you lay out some of these causes for us.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And that is a consequence of entropy and evolution.
[Guest]: Entropy is, of course, that in general, things that we find useful because they are highly
[Guest]: structured like food, as opposed to, you know, sand or dust, don't arise by themselves.
[Guest]: They require special processes, including the input of energy, sunlight and fertilizer.
[Guest]: And that evolution implies that our sources of food will be exploited by other organisms,
[Guest]: by bugs, by fungus.
[Guest]: And so the creation of wealth always requires a struggle left to itself, the natural state
[Amit Varma]: of humanity is poverty, deprivation and disease.
[Amit Varma]: And from here, you know, even a lot of people who accept that, yes, we are much wealthier,
[Amit Varma]: however you measure this, often argue that there's greater and greater inequality.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, whenever I talk about inequality, for example, the hypothetical question I ask
[Amit Varma]: is in which country would you, in which of these two countries would you rather be poor,
[Amit Varma]: Bangladesh or USA?
[Amit Varma]: And of course, people would rather be poor in USA, but the USA has far higher levels
[Amit Varma]: of inequality.
[Amit Varma]: And you illustrated this with a story about two guys called Boris and Igor.
[Guest]: Yes, it's an old story that was told in the Soviet Union of two dirt poor farmers, barely
[Guest]: able to scratch out a living.
[Guest]: The only difference between them is that Igor had a goat, scrawny goat.
[Guest]: One day a fairy godmother appears to Boris, says, I'll grant you one wish.
[Guest]: He said, I wish that Igor's goat should die.
[Guest]: That captures the, first of all, the intuition that equality is not inherently a virtue if
[Guest]: it consists of simply depriving people who have more without benefiting those who have
[Guest]: less.
[Guest]: It also captures the mindset of life under communism in which there was greater desire
[Guest]: to let everyone be equally miserable than that some people are happy or well-fed, even
[Amit Varma]: if not everyone is.
[Amit Varma]: We'll take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: We'll come back in just a minute.
[Unknown]: Hello, hello, hello.
[Unknown]: Welcome to another awesome week on the IBM Podcast Network.
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media, please make sure that you do.
[Unknown]: We're IBM Podcasts on Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram.
[Unknown]: We had a Christmas party in the office last week, and you can see pictures of that on
[Unknown]: our Instagram this week.
[Unknown]: So please do make sure that you do check it out.
[Unknown]: On Cyrus Says, Cyrus, Abbas, and I do a 2018 rewind edition of Cock and Bull, the year's
[Unknown]: biggest political stories, controversies, sporting triumphs, to viral memes.
[Unknown]: We try and pack it all in an hour.
[Unknown]: I don't think we made it.
[Unknown]: On Advertising is Dead, Varun and Karthik Nagarajan, chief content officer at Wavemaker,
[Unknown]: recap the year in advertising and give their predictions for 2019.
[Unknown]: On Simplify, tune into part two of their year-end special with special guest Tony Sebastian.
[Unknown]: On Thalle Harate, our Kannada podcast host Pawan Srinath talks about how the internet
[Unknown]: can be a scary place, as nefarious plots are hashed against companies, governments, and
[Unknown]: people online all the time.
[Unknown]: On the year-end special awardee wordpecker, Rachel takes a look back at the most popular
[Unknown]: words of 2018.
[Unknown]: This week on Puliyabazi, Pranay discusses the impact that space research has on an aspirational
[Unknown]: society and why the argument poor nations shouldn't spend on luxuries like space exploration
[Unknown]: makes little logical sense.
[Unknown]: And guys, it's been a great 2018 and we hope you enjoyed your journey with IVM.
[Unknown]: We're looking forward to bigger and better things in 2019.
[Unknown]: Please do tell a friend about the podcast that you've enjoyed, try and spread the word.
[Unknown]: That's very important for us.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's continue on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Steven Pinker.
[Amit Varma]: Steven, in your chapter about the environment, which is something that people have great
[Amit Varma]: legitimate worries about, and there's a great quote by Stewart Brand, quote, no product
[Amit Varma]: of agriculture is the slightest bit natural to an ecologist.
[Amit Varma]: You take a nice complex ecosystem, chop it into rectangles, clear it to the ground and
[Amit Varma]: hammer it into perpetual early succession.
[Amit Varma]: You bust it, sort, flatten it wide and drench it with vast quantities of constant water.
[Amit Varma]: Then you populate it with uniform monochips of profoundly damaged plants incapable of
[Amit Varma]: living on their own.
[Amit Varma]: Every food plant is a pathetic, narrow specialist in one skill inbred for thousands of years
[Amit Varma]: to a state of genetic idiocy.
[Amit Varma]: These plants are so fragile, they had to domesticate humans just to take endless care of them,
[Amit Varma]: unquote.
[Amit Varma]: And yet everybody wants organic food, naturally grown food.
[Guest]: Yes, and organic food is terrible for the environment because it uses so much more land.
[Guest]: That was Stewart Brand, who is kind of a hero to the counterculture and the whole organic,
[Guest]: small movement in the 1970s when he published the famous book The Whole Earth Catalog, often
[Guest]: considered a predecessor of the World Wide Web, although it was on paper, and he changed
[Guest]: his mind.
[Guest]: He's an environmental activist and in his book Whole Earth Discipline, he helped found
[Guest]: the movement of eco-modernism by arguing that what's best for the environment is density,
[Guest]: is people having less of a footprint on the environment and that includes growing more
[Guest]: food on less land.
[Amit Varma]: And for those who worry that the environment is getting worse, you also talk about the
[Amit Varma]: environmental Kuznets curve, where things appear to get worse as far as the environment
[Amit Varma]: is concerned, but after a while, when societies get more prosperous and they start caring
[Amit Varma]: more about the air around them, it gets better again.
[Guest]: That is a general trend.
[Guest]: It doesn't happen by itself as no kind of progress happens by itself, but as countries
[Guest]: do get more developed and richer, they devote more of their resources to protecting the
[Guest]: environment, to pollution control devices, to laws and enforcing those laws.
[Guest]: And their citizens' values change.
[Guest]: If the main thing you're worried about is getting electricity and you can put up with
[Guest]: a certain amount of environmental damage, your top priority is cooking your food and
[Guest]: heating your home and lighting your lights, even to the point that the worst forms of
[Guest]: pollution are those suffered by poor countries, such as indoor cooking smoke, such as contaminated
[Guest]: water.
[Guest]: As countries get wealthier, they can devote their attention to the worst kinds of pollution,
[Guest]: namely indoor cooking smoke and contaminated water, but also to the cleanliness of their
[Guest]: harbors and rivers and atmosphere, and they can start enforcing laws to curb pollution.
[Guest]: This is certainly obvious to an American visiting Mumbai, as we are now, where looking out the
[Guest]: window we can barely see the skyline of the city just a couple of miles away because of
[Guest]: the thick smog, which you never see in an American city, although of course American
[Guest]: cities in the 1950s and the 1960s were notorious for their smog, but then because of technology
[Guest]: and laws and regulations, American and European cities have managed to bring the rate of air
[Amit Varma]: pollution considerably down.
[Amit Varma]: If you think Bombay is bad, you should go to Delhi.
[Guest]: So I've heard.
[Amit Varma]: You also talk about how sort of technology, we kind of take technology for granted and
[Amit Varma]: assume when we are extrapolating for the future that it's going to stay as it is, but we keep
[Amit Varma]: innovating.
[Amit Varma]: Like you point out how throughout history there's been this process of decarbonization.
[Amit Varma]: To quote again from your book, quote, the oldest hydrocarbon fuel, dry wood, has a ratio
[Amit Varma]: of combustible carbon atoms to hydrogen atoms of about 10 to 1.
[Amit Varma]: The coal which replaced it during the industrial revolution has a ratio of 2 to 1.
[Amit Varma]: A petroleum fuel such as kerosene may have 1 to 2.
[Amit Varma]: Natural gas is composed mainly of methane with a ratio of 1 to 4.
[Amit Varma]: We are just getting better and better and more and more efficient and part of it is
[Amit Varma]: of course that as the costs of all of those earlier fuels rise, people innovate.
[Guest]: People innovate and people when they can afford it, they don't want to breathe polluted air
[Guest]: and they figure out ways of getting the energy they need with less pollution if they recognize
[Guest]: that pollution is a problem and if they apply their ingenuity to reducing it.
[Guest]: That could continue with the development of both renewable energy sources like solar and
[Guest]: wind and the development of nuclear power which another heresy of the eco-modernist
[Guest]: movement, many eco-modernists are advocates of nuclear power as the most abundant scalable
[Guest]: form of zero carbon energy even though nuclear has a terrible reputation, actually is extraordinarily
[Guest]: safe compared to coal and oil and gas which kill far more people every single year and
[Guest]: of course nuclear power does not generate CO2.
[Guest]: So it may be that we need within the next couple of decades a whole new generation of
[Guest]: nuclear technology, so-called fourth generation, small modular reactors that are much less
[Guest]: expensive, much less prone to accidents than existing reactors and it may be that that
[Guest]: technology will be the next leap in the process of decarbonization if we encourage it.
[Amit Varma]: And that also explains why, you know, you make a very convincing case for why nuclear
[Amit Varma]: energy is something that is unnecessarily given a bad rap and you also talk about the
[Amit Varma]: false binary between environment and development.
[Amit Varma]: One did not come at the cost of the other.
[Guest]: Yes, I mean there are some areas in which there is some tension but with technology,
[Guest]: with knowledge, we can apply human ingenuity to figure out how to get more human benefits
[Guest]: with less environmental damage.
[Guest]: It won't happen by itself, it has to be a goal to reduce the environmental damage but
[Guest]: that does tend to become a goal as people satisfy their most basic needs, just feeding
[Guest]: themselves and their children and getting to work and lighting their homes and they
[Guest]: do tend to be more concerned about the environment.
[Guest]: No one wants to breathe smog and so they encourage measures that do that.
[Guest]: In rich countries like the United States and Europe, over the last 40 years at the same
[Guest]: time as population has grown, GDP has grown, even number of miles has increased but the
[Guest]: levels of air pollution and water pollution have decreased.
[Amit Varma]: You know there are a bunch of other chapters where you go through metrics like safety,
[Amit Varma]: democracy, equal rights, knowledge but since we're running out of time, I'll just skip
[Amit Varma]: over them, encourage my listeners to sort of just buy the book and read all of them
[Amit Varma]: and go over to the big questions that are kind of safe for the end.
[Amit Varma]: Here's one, you know at one point you talk about the post-truth era and I'm quoting from
[Amit Varma]: you, you say editorialists should retire the new clich that we are in a post-truth era
[Amit Varma]: unless they can keep up a tone of scatting irony.
[Amit Varma]: The term is corrosive because it implies that we should resign ourselves to propaganda and
[Amit Varma]: lies and just fight back with more of our own.
[Amit Varma]: We are not in a post-truth era, mendacity, truth shading, conspiracy theories, extraordinary
[Amit Varma]: popular delusions and the madness of crowds are as old as our species and so is the conviction
[Amit Varma]: that some ideas are right and others are wrong.
[Amit Varma]: Where I would kind of say that modern times are possibly different because what social
[Amit Varma]: media does is it pushes us into echo chambers where we are sort of, we find like-minded
[Amit Varma]: people, we confirm our prejudices, we confirm our biases and within those echo chambers
[Amit Varma]: is really no talking to each other, you know we just get stuck in those, is that something
[Amit Varma]: that kind of worries you?
[Guest]: I mean that does happen although the polarization in the United States was really begun before
[Unknown]: the advent of social media.
[Guest]: It was begun in large part by cable news channels and even before that there were right-wing
[Guest]: magazines and left-wing magazines and right-wing newspapers and left-wing newspapers and the
[Guest]: thing about the internet is that you're one click away from an opposing viewpoint whereas
[Guest]: in print media you have to actually go out and buy a newspaper or magazine from the other
[Guest]: side of the political spectrum.
[Guest]: So even though there has been a trend toward polarization at least in the United States
[Guest]: and Europe, I think it's become a lazy habit to blame everything that goes wrong on social
[Guest]: media.
[Guest]: I think this process began before social media and it may have occurred even without it.
[Guest]: I think part of it is driven by the increasing division by education and income where people
[Guest]: are much more likely to live with people who have the same level of education as they do.
[Guest]: Neighborhoods have become more segregated by education and education tends to go with
[Guest]: political opinion or by profession.
[Guest]: The business people, the doctors and lawyers and professors, the small business owners,
[Guest]: factory workers tend to live with others of the same type and so some of the residential
[Guest]: segregation is another factor.
[Guest]: But social media only became popular starting in the late 2000s so we can't blame things
[Amit Varma]: that have been going on for decades.
[Amit Varma]: Well absolutely but there's a theory that for example the rise of Trump in the USA and
[Amit Varma]: Modi here is partly exacerbated by that because it led to what you would call preference cascades
[Amit Varma]: where say in the context of India I often say that people who were closeted bigots would
[Amit Varma]: do preference falsification where they would not express their feelings in public because
[Amit Varma]: hey it was uncool but suddenly the internet shows them that hey there are a lot of other
[Amit Varma]: closet bigots out there and they feel validated and empowered by that.
[Guest]: That is true because even as opinions that used to be taboo are now expressed on social
[Guest]: media overall worldwide in India, in the United States, everywhere the rate of actual bigotry
[Guest]: has gone down.
[Guest]: The rate of sexism, the rate of homophobia but the minority and they still exist who
[Guest]: are bigoted are able to express their views, find people who are of like minds and therefore
[Guest]: have a forum for expressing ideas that used to be taboo even if they are becoming numerically
[Amit Varma]: less common.
[Amit Varma]: When you were earlier asked at the talk you gave at the Times Lit Fest here about populism
[Amit Varma]: and you said you were optimistic populism would go away and you gave three reasons for
[Amit Varma]: that and those reasons were that one older people tend to be populist and they'll die
[Amit Varma]: off, two it's a factor of education that the more education you have the less populist
[Amit Varma]: you're likely to be and the third is that the more urbanized you are the less likely
[Amit Varma]: you are to be populist but I'd actually venture to say that all of these might be true in
[Amit Varma]: the US.
[Amit Varma]: It's the exact opposite in India.
[Amit Varma]: You find that the most populism comes from all the engineers, it's rampant in the cities
[Amit Varma]: and it's probably more widespread among young people than otherwise.
[Guest]: Well it's true in the United States, in Europe and in Britain so I don't know about data
[Guest]: from India.
[Guest]: So we need to know, it's not a question of whether it's rampant in cities, the question
[Guest]: is is it more rampant than it is in the more rural areas.
[Amit Varma]: Right fair enough at some point I'll get you data on that.
[Amit Varma]: Another interesting thing you sort of talk about is the dangers of tribalism in the academy.
[Amit Varma]: You know earlier during this conversation you mentioned how Chris Rock when he cracked
[Amit Varma]: that joke may not be able to get away with it today with all the political correctness
[Amit Varma]: and you know we know the dangers of the right, what the populists are doing and so on because
[Amit Varma]: their dangers are you know if they are bigoted they're openly bigoted but what you often
[Amit Varma]: have from some factions of the far left is that there's a lot of sanctimony which hides
[Amit Varma]: the identity politics that is playing out.
[Guest]: I think that is a problem and in fact the two problems are not independent because many
[Guest]: people who have been attracted to populism list among their top reasons that they are
[Guest]: sick of political correctness.
[Guest]: That was the very first thing that Donald Trump said in the very first debate among
[Guest]: the Republican candidates, he got a huge reaction and it is true that within many mainstream
[Guest]: publications within universities there are certain, there is definitely a shift toward
[Guest]: a political left accompanied by a suppression of hypotheses and opinions that don't conform
[Guest]: to a certain left wing orthodoxy.
[Guest]: Now of the two polls that we're seeing, the movement to the left in academia and the movement
[Guest]: to the right in politics, the movement to the right in politics is much more worrying
[Guest]: because politicians have power and professors don't.
[Guest]: Nonetheless, since they do feed each other, since I know former students, people who write
[Guest]: to me who are, they're not idiots, they're intelligent, they're educated but they feel
[Guest]: so excluded by the confines of left wing political correctness that they are tempted to join
[Guest]: the right just because they think that's a place where at least the opinions can be expressed.
[Guest]: So I think that to prevent that from happening, academics should be careful to preserve diversity
[Guest]: of political backgrounds, expression of ideas even if they're unpopular, the marketplace
[Guest]: of ideas.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And in your book you make a very strong case for progress, you believe it will continue
[Amit Varma]: but you don't think it's inevitable.
[Guest]: What are the threats to humanism?
[Guest]: Certainly the rise of the whole family of movements that we tend to call authoritarian
[Guest]: populism.
[Guest]: These include religious identity, they include ethnic and national chauvinism and jingoism,
[Guest]: include the cynicism toward institutions such as liberal democracy, regulated markets, international
[Guest]: organizations like the UN and treaties and international pacts.
[Guest]: The idea that progress comes from charismatic leaders who authentically voice the soul of
[Guest]: the people rather than by rules and laws and fiduciary duties and responsibilities that
[Guest]: are built into the institutions rather than the virtue of the particular people who hold
[Guest]: those positions of power.
[Guest]: We see that in the United States and of course in other countries including India and the
[Guest]: tendency of leaders to try to run around the safeguards written into law simply because
[Guest]: they are popular, they know the truth, they have the people behind them.
[Guest]: That of course is the path toward a dictatorship and disaster.
[Guest]: So all of these trends and they tend to correlate, tends to be some of the same people who believe
[Guest]: all of them are threats to humanism.
[Guest]: There's also of course a trend against humanism in more radical forms of Marxism and leftism
[Guest]: that prioritize the interests of the class above the well-being of individual people
[Guest]: and that tend to encourage demonization of one class by another.
[Amit Varma]: And like you point out, one of the strengths of the Enlightenment is that we think in terms
[Amit Varma]: of individuals rather than groups and or classes of people.
[Guest]: Yeah, very much and not because of some a priori commitment to individualism but simply
[Guest]: because it's individuals who can suffer and flourish and feel pleasure and pain.
[Guest]: Only metaphorically can an entire religion or an entire ethnic group flourish or suffer.
[Guest]: It's the individual people who actually feel the pain.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: So I know you're in a hurry so I'm going to end with one last question and I'm going to
[Amit Varma]: ask you to be a sport on this.
[Amit Varma]: In your book you pointed out that students in Talmudic debates are often asked to argue
[Amit Varma]: the other side.
[Amit Varma]: So can you tell me briefly why the world is going to hell?
[Guest]: Well it could if we don't deal with the problem of climate change and things could get a lot
[Guest]: worse.
[Guest]: If a nuclear war were to break out, even though it's improbable, but it could do such tremendous
[Guest]: damage that it could cancel out all of the incremental advances.
[Guest]: It's been said that if India and Pakistan had a full-fledged nuclear war that could
[Guest]: send enough debris and soot into the atmosphere to cause a period of cooling that could lead
[Guest]: to mass famine and crop failure.
[Guest]: There could be pandemics, there could be cyber terrorism or cyber sabotage, there may be
[Guest]: vulnerabilities of the system that we don't yet understand that could be exploited.
[Guest]: And it could be that the future belongs to Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin and Viktor
[Guest]: Orban rather than to the world's liberal Democrats.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for that very bleak vision, you should have called your book Enlightenment
[Amit Varma]: Never.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks so much for coming on the show, Stephen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, do head on over to your nearest bookstore and pick
[Amit Varma]: up a copy of Enlightenment Now.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Stephen on Twitter at SA Pinker OneWord.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: And you can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen on seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Do you wish you were smarter?
[Unknown]: Well, so do we.
[Unknown]: But the next best thing?
[Unknown]: We could make you sound smarter.
[Unknown]: And to help you with this endeavor, we are Simplified, a podcast that attempts to break
[Unknown]: down the complex world around you with a little knowledge, a lot of poor jokes and a ton of
[Unknown]: random trivia.
[Unknown]: Episodes out every Monday on the IBM podcast app or wherever you get your podcasts.
[Unknown]: See ya!